# Random Number Generator

## Introduction
A Random Number Generator (RNG) is a computational or physical process that generates a sequence of numbers with no discernible pattern and appearing random. A random number is one generated by a process, whose outcome is unpredictable and cannot be subsequentially reliably reproduced. In other words, knowing previous random numbers ("deviates") provides no extra information about the value of the subsequent random numbers. Random number generators are widely used in computer science, statistics, numerical simulation, and cryptography.

There are two main types of RNGs - true random number generators (TRNGs) and pseudorandom number generators (PRNGs). 

TRNGs generate random numbers from unpredictable physical processes. Quantum physics, which is inherently unpredictable, is a natural ideal candidate for generating truly random numbers. For example, [this experiment] (https://arxiv.org/pdf/1107.4438) transforms vacuum field contained in the radio-frequency sidebands of a single-mode laser into a string of random numbers. [This whitepaper] (https://canvas.uchicago.edu/courses/52540/files/9986928?wrap=1) outlines another scheme of generating true random numbers by encoding '0' and '1' based on the transmission port of single-photons upon a semi-transparent mirror. 

PRNGs uses computer algorithms and an initial value (seed) to generate random numbers that appear random but are, in fact, deterministic. The same seed would produce the same sequence of numbers. PRNGs are still suitable and appropriate for many applications, especially when the convenience of generating the pseudorandom numbers outweigh the cost of producing the high quality true random numbers. However, random number generators can have pretty poor quality, even if they might look random at first sight. [This document] (http://physics.ucsc.edu/~peter/115/randu.pdf) uncovers the unwanted underlying structure underneath the random generator routine `randu`, where all triplets of points generated by `randu` lie on one of the 15 planes $9x-6y+z=m$, revealing that the routine fails badly in the correlation test.




In this project, I study xx different RNGs: `rnd()`, `randm()`, `randu`, `random_number`, `R250` generator, `ran0` in Numerical Recipe, and a paper posted on Canvas. For each RNG, I will
- explain how the random number is generated
- test and visualize the performance of the random numbers generated
- conclude about the respective qualities of these RNGs. 

I will test the RNGs in a few ways with various degree of statistical rigor: 
- sort the random numbers in histogram bins and check for statistically significant deviations from the mean (vary the seed, and the numerical precision of the variable holding the random number)
- examine correlations between triplets
- plot the frequency of appearance of 0-9 integers at a certain decimal position
- implement the "maximum spacing" method in J. Heinrich's paper

## Fundamentals of RNGs
**This text is bold**


## Performance Testing of the RNGs
Here are several ways of testing the quality of a random number generator. 

Testing random # generators 1: random_number_generators_article.pdf Download random_number_generators_article.pdf 

Testing random # generators 2: p1192-parkmiller.pdf Download p1192-parkmiller.pdf 

Testing random # generators 3: cdf6850_badrand-1.pdf Download cdf6850_badrand-1.pdf 


How the histogram works. 
Can make fancy plots for the distribution - q-q plot, chi-square distribution, sigma testing, with brief justification, 3D plots (random angle, and find the angle that display the bad structure) 
